LONGITUDINAL MODELING OF SLEEP TIMING,
DURATION, AND SOCIAL JETLAG ACROSS THE
ADULT LIFESPAN USING HIGH-RESOLUTION
WEARABLE DATA
Mason Manetta1, Angus Burns2, Shea Andrews1, Yue Leng1,
Diego Mazzotti3
1University of California, San Francisco, 2Harvard Medical School,
3University of Kansas Medical Center
Introduction: Reliable longitudinal sleep measurements are crit-
ical for chrono-epidemiology, as misalignment and variability are
strongly associated with chronic diseases. Self-reporting methods
or short-term monitoring can fail to capture longer term pat-
terns required for risk stratification. Therefore, we used device-
measured sleep data from the All of Us (AoU) research program
to characterize age, sex, and environmental contributors to sleep
patterns.
Methods: We analyzed 22,428,610 nights of filtered Fitbit sleep
data from 42,290 AoU participants. We calculated nightly onset,
offset, and duration, excluding non-primary sleep and episodes
>18h. Linear Mixed-Effects Models (LMMs) with person as random
effects were used to control for employment, weekend status,
sex, seasonality, and age incorporating quadratic age terms and
employment weekend interactions.
Results: The cohort (71% White, 67% Female, 52 ± 17y) con-
tributed a median of 109 nights (mean: 530) of recorded sleep
(mean duration 7.45h, median 7.53h). All reported associations
were significant (p< 0.001). Age showed a quadratic trend in sleep
timing across the lifespan. Sleep midpoint showed a maximum
advance of ∼42 minutes between young adulthood (age 18, 2:37
AM) and older age (age 57, 1:54 AM). Sleep duration increased
with age gaining over 34 minutes between ages 18 (7.45h) and
85 (8.02h). Furthermore, the employment-weekend interaction
showed a delay in midpoint, onset, and offset and increased dura-
tion across all groups. Participants "Employed for Wages" showed
the greatest social jetlag (average midpoint delay) of ∼42 minutes
on weekends (4:08 AM) compared to weekdays (3:26 AM). This
shift was accompanied by a duration extension of ∼28 minutes
on weekends (7.95h) vs. weekdays (7.48h). Finally, seasonality
analysis revealed an 11-minute decrease in sleep duration in June
compared to the maximum observed in January.
Conclusion: This large-scale analysis confirms that sleep tim-
ing and duration are dynamically determined by non-linear age
effects, strong social constraints, temporal effects, and measur-
able environmental factors. Our findings provide population-level
characterization essential for future genetic and clinical studies
targeting personalized interventions for circadian misalignment.
Support (if any): All of Us Research Program, Office of the Director,
NIH
